.TH DHCPGEN 1 "July 2025" "zone-tools" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dhcpgen \- generate DNS $GENERATE directives for DHCP host ranges
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dhcpgen
[\fB\-hoststart\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-hostname\fR \fIprefix\fR]
[\fB\-origin\fR \fIdomain\fR]
[\fB\-mx\fR \fIhost\fR]
[\fB\-mx_priority\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-comments\fR]
[\fB\-o\fR \fIoutput\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR]
\fIstart_ip\fR \fIend_ip\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dhcpgen
creates DNS $GENERATE directives for bulk DHCP host creation across IP address ranges.
The program automatically handles Class C network boundaries, skips reserved addresses
(.0 and .255), and provides sequential host numbering.

The tool is designed for creating large numbers of DNS entries for DHCP pools,
automatically generating the appropriate $GENERATE directives that can be included
in DNS zone files.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-hoststart " " \fIN\fR
Starting host number for sequential numbering. Default is 0.
Host numbers increment sequentially across the entire IP range.
.TP
.BR \-hostname " " \fIprefix\fR
Hostname prefix for generated hosts. Default is "dhcp".
Generated hostnames will be prefix-N where N is the sequential host number.
.TP
.BR \-origin " " \fIdomain\fR
DNS domain to append to hostnames. If specified, hostnames become fully qualified.
.TP
.BR \-mx " " \fIhost\fR
Add MX record generation for each host pointing to the specified mail server.
.TP
.BR \-mx_priority " " \fIN\fR
MX record priority when \fB\-mx\fR is specified. Default is 0.
.TP
.BR \-comments
Add detailed comments showing IP ranges, hostname mappings, and host counts.
.TP
.BR \-o " " \fIoutput\fR
Write output to specified file instead of standard output.
.TP
.BR \-h
Show help message and exit.

.SH FEATURES
.IP \(bu 2
Automatically handles Class C network boundaries
.IP \(bu 2
Skips reserved network (.0) and broadcast (.255) addresses
.IP \(bu 2
Sequential host numbering across multiple networks
.IP \(bu 2
Generates both A and optional MX record directives
.IP \(bu 2
Validates IPv4 addresses and ranges
.IP \(bu 2
Supports custom hostname prefixes and DNS domains
.IP \(bu 2
Provides detailed comments for generated ranges

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Generate basic $GENERATE directives for a simple range:
.RS
.nf
dhcpgen 10.1.50.10 10.1.50.50
.fi
.RE

.PP
Generate with comments and custom hostname:
.RS
.nf
dhcpgen -comments -hostname guest 10.1.50.10 10.1.51.20
.fi
.RE

.PP
Generate with custom starting number and domain:
.RS
.nf
dhcpgen -hoststart 100 -hostname dhcp -origin example.com 192.168.1.10 192.168.2.10
.fi
.RE

.PP
Generate with MX records:
.RS
.nf
dhcpgen -mx mail.example.com -mx_priority 10 -origin example.com 10.0.1.1 10.0.1.100
.fi
.RE

.SH INPUT FORMAT
The program requires two IPv4 addresses as arguments:
.IP \(bu 2
\fIstart_ip\fR: Starting IP address of the range
.IP \(bu 2
\fIend_ip\fR: Ending IP address of the range (inclusive)

Both addresses must be valid IPv4 addresses, and start_ip must be less than or equal to end_ip.

.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
The program generates DNS $GENERATE directives in standard format:

.PP
Basic A record generation:
.RS
.nf
$GENERATE 10-50 dhcp-${0,2,d} IN A 10.1.50.$
.fi
.RE

.PP
With comments enabled:
.RS
.nf
; Creating $GENERATE directives for addresses 10.1.50.10 through 10.1.50.50
; 41 hosts total, starting from host 0

; 10.1.50.10-10.1.50.50 => dhcp-00 to dhcp-40, 41 hosts
$GENERATE 10-50 dhcp-${0,2,d} IN A 10.1.50.$
.fi
.RE

.PP
With MX records:
.RS
.nf
$GENERATE 10-50 dhcp-${0,2,d} IN A 10.1.50.$
$GENERATE 10-50 dhcp-${0,2,d} IN MX "10 mail.example.com."
.fi
.RE

.SH NETWORK HANDLING
The program intelligently handles Class C network boundaries:
.IP \(bu 2
Automatically splits ranges across /24 network boundaries
.IP \(bu 2
Skips .0 (network) and .255 (broadcast) addresses
.IP \(bu 2
Maintains sequential host numbering across networks
.IP \(bu 2
Generates separate $GENERATE directives for each network

.PP
Example across network boundary:
.RS
.nf
dhcpgen -comments 10.1.0.250 10.1.1.10

; 10.1.0.250-10.1.0.255 => dhcp-0 to dhcp-4, 5 hosts
$GENERATE 250-254 dhcp-${0,2,d} IN A 10.1.0.$

; 10.1.1.0-10.1.1.10 => dhcp-5 to dhcp-14, 10 hosts  
$GENERATE 1-10 dhcp-${5,2,d} IN A 10.1.1.$
.fi
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B dhcpgen
exits with status 0 on success, or 1 if an error occurs:
.IP \(bu 2
Invalid IP address format
.IP \(bu 2
Invalid IP range (start > end)
.IP \(bu 2
Negative host start number
.IP \(bu 2
Empty hostname prefix
.IP \(bu 2
Invalid DNS domain format
.IP \(bu 2
No valid host addresses in range
.IP \(bu 2
File I/O errors

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkarpa3 (1),
.BR named (8),
.BR named-checkzone (8)

.SH AUTHOR
Part of the zone-tools suite for DNS zone file management.