.TH EXTRACT-KEA-CONFIGS 1 "2025-07-08" "zone-tools" "DNS Zone Management"
.SH NAME
extract-kea-configs \- Extract network configurations from Kea DHCP config files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B extract-kea-configs
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIkea-config-file\fR \fIzone-file\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B extract-kea-configs.py
parses Kea DHCP configuration files to automatically extract network configurations and generate DHCP reservation files using the mkkea tool. The script identifies subnet definitions and their corresponding include directives, then processes each network to create appropriate reservation files.

The script handles Kea's JSON-with-comments format by cleaning the configuration file to make it valid JSON, then parsing the structure to extract subnet and include information.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mkkea " " \fIcommand\fR
Specify the path to the mkkea command. Default is "mkkea".
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output showing detailed processing information.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Perform a dry run showing what commands would be executed without actually running them.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help message and exit.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I kea-config-file
Path to the Kea DHCP configuration file to parse. The file should contain subnet4 definitions with include directives.
.TP
.I zone-file
Path to the DNS zone file that will be processed by mkkea to generate DHCP reservations.

.SH CONFIGURATION FORMAT
The script expects Kea configuration files with the following structure:

.nf
{
  "Dhcp4": {
    "subnet4": [
      {
        "subnet": "10.0.0.0/16",
        "reservations": [
          <?include "./kea-unrestricted.conf"?>
        ]
      },
      {
        "subnet": "10.253.0.0/16", 
        "reservations": [
          <?include "./kea-restricted.conf"?>
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
.fi

.SH NETWORK IDENTIFICATION
The script uses the filename from the include directive as the network identifier. For example:
.IP \(bu 2
<?include "./kea-unrestricted.conf"?> creates network "kea-unrestricted.conf"
.IP \(bu 2
<?include "./kea-hosts.conf"?> creates network "kea-hosts.conf"

This approach works with any filename convention and doesn't require specific comment formatting.

.SH KEA EXTENSIONS HANDLED
The script handles the following Kea-specific JSON extensions:
.IP \(bu 2
Comments starting with # (outside quoted strings)
.IP \(bu 2
<?include "filename"?> directives

These extensions are cleaned from the JSON before parsing to ensure compatibility with standard JSON parsers.

.SH OUTPUT
For each network configuration found, the script:
.IP 1. 3
Identifies the subnet CIDR and include filename
.IP 2. 3
Runs mkkea with the appropriate network filter
.IP 3. 3
Generates a DHCP reservation file

The output shows:
.IP \(bu 2
Network processing status with CIDR and output filename
.IP \(bu 2
Success/failure indicators for each generated file
.IP \(bu 2
Summary of total configurations processed

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Basic usage:
.B extract-kea-configs.py kea-dhcp4.conf zones/example.com.zone

.TP
With custom mkkea path:
.B extract-kea-configs.py -m /usr/local/bin/mkkea kea-dhcp4.conf zone.file

.TP
Verbose dry run:
.B extract-kea-configs.py -v -n kea-dhcp4.conf zone.file

.TP
Full path example:
.B extract-kea-configs.py -m ../bin/mkkea NEW.conf ../zones/home.example.com.zone

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success - all network configurations processed successfully
.TP
.B 1
Error - invalid arguments, file not found, JSON parsing error, or mkkea execution failure

.SH FILES
.TP
.I kea-dhcp4.conf
Typical Kea DHCP configuration file
.TP
.I *.zone
DNS zone files containing host records with TXT records for DHCP configuration

.SH DEPENDENCIES
.IP \(bu 2
Python 3.6 or later
.IP \(bu 2
mkkea command (from zone-tools package)
.IP \(bu 2
Valid Kea DHCP configuration file
.IP \(bu 2
DNS zone file with TXT records containing kea: directives

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkkea (1),
.BR kea-dhcp4 (8),
.BR named-checkzone (1)

.SH COMPATIBILITY
Works with Kea DHCP server configuration files. Tested with Kea versions that support the <?include ?> directive and JSON-with-comments format.

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
Requires include directives in subnet reservations for network identification
.IP \(bu 2
Assumes include files follow the "./filename" path format
.IP \(bu 2
May need updates for future Kea JSON extensions beyond <?include ?> and # comments

.SH AUTHOR
Generated as part of the zone-tools DNS management suite.

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the zone-tools project maintainer.